feat: add transcription with `experimental_transcribe` (#5496)
vercel/ai: content/docs/03-ai-sdk-core/36-transcription.mdx

---
title: Transcription
description: Learn how to transcribe audio with the AI SDK.
---

# Transcription

<Note type="warning">Transcription is an experimental feature.</Note>

The AI SDK provides the [`generateTranscript`](/docs/reference/ai-sdk-core/generate-transcript)
function to transcribe audio using a transcription model.

> ```tsx

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```ts
```

import { experimental_generateTranscript as generateTranscript } from 'ai';
import { openai } from '@ai-sdk/openai';

const { transcript } = await generateTranscript({
  model: openai.transcription('whisper-1'),

>   audio: audioData,

Reviewer: wonder if we can make this more copy and pasteable? e.g. pointing to a hosted url in the repo or in the local filesystem with a .mp3/.wav so it's easily replaceable?

thoughts @lgrammel ?

Reviewer 2: I guess we can add the fs.readFile from the executable example

});
```

> The `audio` property is very flexible and can be a `Blob`, `File`, `Uint8Array`, `ArrayBuffer`, `Buffer`, `URL` or a string (e.g. a URL or base64 encoded data).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `audio` property can be a `Blob`, `File`, `Uint8Array`, `ArrayBuffer`, `Buffer`, `URL` or a string (e.g. a URL or base64 encoded data).
```

> As for the response, you can access the transcript data like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To access the generated transcript:
```

```tsx
const text = transcript.text; // transcript text e.g. "Hello, world!"
const segments = transcript.segments; // array of segments with start and end times, if available
const language = transcript.language; // language of the transcript if available e.g. "en"
const duration = transcript.duration; // duration of the transcript if available in seconds
```

## Settings

> ### Provider-specific Settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Provider-specific settings
```

> Transcription models often have provider- or even model-specific settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transcription models often have provider or model-specific settings.
```

> You can pass such settings to the `generateTranscript` function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which you can set
```

> using the `providerOptions` parameter. The options for the provider

Reviewer: not sure we need that final sentence
cc @lgrammel

  providerOptions: {
    openai: {
      timestampGranularities: ['word'],
    },
  },
});
```

### Abort Signals and Timeouts

`generateTranscript` accepts an optional `abortSignal` parameter of
type [`AbortSignal`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/AbortSignal)
that you can use to abort the transcription process or set a timeout.

```ts highlight={"7"}
import { openai } from '@ai-sdk/openai';
import { experimental_generateTranscript as generateTranscript } from 'ai';

const { transcript } = await generateTranscript({
  model: openai.transcription('whisper-1'),
  audio: audioData,
  abortSignal: AbortSignal.timeout(1000), // Abort after 1 second
});
```

### Custom Headers

`generateTranscript` accepts an optional `headers` parameter of type `Record<string, string>`
that you can use to add custom headers to the transcription request.

```ts highlight={"7"}
import { openai } from '@ai-sdk/openai';
import { experimental_generateTranscript as generateTranscript } from 'ai';

const { transcript } = await generateTranscript({
  model: openai.transcription('whisper-1'),
  audio: audioData,
  headers: { 'X-Custom-Header': 'custom-value' },
});
```

### Warnings

> If the model returns warnings, e.g. for unsupported parameters, they will be available in the `warnings` property of the response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Warnings (e.g. unsupported parameters are available on the `warnings` property.
```

```tsx
const { transcript, warnings } = await generateTranscript({
  model: openai.transcription('whisper-1'),
  audio: audioData,
});
```

### Error Handling

When `generateTranscript` cannot generate a valid transcript, it throws a [`AI_NoTranscriptGeneratedError`](/docs/reference/ai-sdk-errors/ai-no-transcript-generated-error).

> This error occurs when the AI provider fails to generate a transcript. It can arise due to the following reasons:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This error can arise for any the following reasons:
```

- The model failed to generate a response
- The model generated a response that could not be parsed

The error preserves the following information to help you log the issue:

- `responses`: Metadata about the image model responses, including timestamp, model, and headers.

> - `cause`: The cause of the error. You can use this for more detailed error handling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `cause`: The cause of the error. You can use this for more detailed error handling.
```

```ts

> import { generateTranscript, NoTranscriptGeneratedError } from 'ai';

Reviewer: should this be `experimental_generateTranscription`?
